# **UCB FinTech Bootcamp Module 5 Challenge**
# *Financial Planner*
## **Introduction**
### The Bootcamp Module 5 Challenge - Financial Planner  consists of two main analysis scenarios for an investment portfolio which require the use of an APIs to access performance data for the given investment instruments in the portfolio - e.g. stocks, bonds and crypto currencies - and using Monte Carlo simulation approach to forecast and evaluate the expected portfolio performance over time. Both scenarios utilize plotting tools to present the analysis in a visual manner to drive better decision making.
---
## **Goals and Objectives**
### *Part I.* Create a Financial Planner for Emergencies. Evaluate the investment portfolio of credit union employees - comprised of stocks, bonds and cryptocurrencies. With data from [Alpaca](https://app.alpaca.markets/paper/dashboard/overview) and using their API to access it, we compare the portfolio value verus a given emergency fund target.

### *Part II.* Create a Financial Planner for Retirement. We use the [Alpaca](https://app.alpaca.markets/paper/dashboard/overview) API to get historical closing prices for a given retirement portfolio comprised of stocks and bonds. Using the Monte Carlo simulations module, we forecast the portfolio performance for a period of 30 years into the future first, and then a reduced 10 year period to assess retirement strategies vs the portfolio expected performance according to the simulation.
---
## **Technologies and Tools**
### The following list includes the main technologies and tools using during the preparation and deployment of the solution:
### 1. *Python* - Programming language used to code the solution. Version 3.7.13 was used
### 2. *GitHub* - Reposotory for code deployment, version management and documentation of the presented solution
### 3. *Jupyter Labs* - IDE tool for coding, code testing/debugging and solution documentation. Version V3.4.4 was used
### 4. *Git Bash console* - Local console used to test the coded solution and sync wiht GitHub Version 2.40.0.windows.1 was utilized
### 5. *Slack* - Collaboration tool to communicate and brainstorm with other FinTech Bootcamp participants
### 6. *Operative System* - This solution was prepared in a PC running Windows 11 v H22
### 7. *[Alpaca](https://app.alpaca.markets/paper/dashboard/overview)*. -Alpaca is a commission-free trading platform that provides API access to the financial markets. It offers a suite of developer tools that enables traders to build and automate their trading strategies using real-time data. 
### 8. *MCForecastTools library* - The MCSimulation Python module contains multiple functions and parameters that help us configure, run, and evaluate a Monte Carlo simulation using the portfolio information (e.g. from Alpaca) to complete analysis for a given scenario. For more information on the module, the code is available [here](https://courses.bootcampspot.com/courses/3426/files/2589674/download)

## **Installation Guide**

### 1. Alpaca - To be able to use the Alpaca's API and SDK you need to install the package in your Python environment as follows:
#### 1.1. Open the GitBash terminal
#### 1.2 Type the following command and press Enter:
```python 
pip install alpaca-trade-api
```
### 2. dotenv -  The dotenv library allows you to securely use your API keys in your code without having to explicitly include it the code or in the repository (GitLab, GitHub) where the code resides. To install dotenv in your Python environment, you can use pip, the package installer for Python:
#### 2.1. Open the GitBash terminal
#### 2.2 Type the following command and press Enter:
```python 
pip install python-dotenv
```
### 3. JSON - This module allows us to load and read data from the source (e.g. Alpaca, NASDAQ) in a human understandable format. It comes standard with the Python enviroment installation so there should be no need to install separately. Just in case, if you have to install, the instructionsa are:
#### 3.1. Open the GitBash terminal
#### 3.2 Type the following command and press Enter:
```python 
pip install json
```
## **Solution Structure**

### The **[5.Financial Planner](https://github.com/LUTOV001/5.Financial_Planner)** repository in GitHub contains the solution components.

#### The repository consists of the following folders, subfolders and contents as described below:
 
###    1. Images : Includes the .png image files to illustrate the instructions in the solution Jupyter Notebook. 
###    2. Solution
####   | 2.1 : Sol_Images: Includes the images of the graphs/plots generated by the coded solution in the Jupyter Notebook.
####   | 2.2 : gitignore *Note on gitignore for this challenge:* Since the API Keys that allow you to retrieve data (and potentially transact/trade) with the key providers (e.g. Alpacas, NASDAQ) are personal and private, they should not be stored or uploaded to the repository where the code resides (e.g GitHub, GitLab), neither in the code (read on dotenv above) nor as files. For this reason, it is essential that the gitignore file includes the setting to ignore the file types where API keys are stored (.env files) so they are not inadvertedly loadead to the repository.
####   | 2.3 : MCForecastTools.py: This is the Monte Carlo simulation module used in the solution 
####   | 2.4 : README.md - The preset file containing this outline
####   | 2.5 : SAMPLE.env - This is a sample .env file to show how the file with the user's API keys needs to be created so the main program can utilize it
####   | 2.6 : *financial_planning_tools.ipynb* is the Jupyter Notebook with the code for the core challenge solution 
###    
###    

## **User Instructions**
### 1. Launch the Jupyter Lab from the GitBash terminal using the following command line:
```python 
jupyter lab --ContentsManager.allow_hidden=True
```
### 2.From the Jupyter Lab terminal, navigate to the Solutions folder and open the financial_planning_tools.ipynb notebook
### 3. Open the SAMPLE.env folder and create your own file with your own API keys. Note that the values are to be entered between quotation marks
### 4. Click on the file created above and rename it to .env 
**Note** *This will avoid your keys being loaded to GitHub, as per the gitignore file settings*
### 5.Reset the Kernel and
### 6.Run the steps in sequence and verify the results as per the comments, including outputs on the screen as well as saved files (e.g. plot images in the Sol_Images folder)
####

## **Credits**

### Prepared by Luis Torres 
### LUTOV001@gmail.com
### April 2023
